.Dd June 20, 2026
.Dt CLODE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm clode
.Nd build a standalone Claude Code binary for your machine
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm build
.Op Fl -naude
.Op Fl -out Ar path
.Nm
.Cm fetch
.Op Cm stable | latest | Ar version
.Nm
.Cm watch
.Nm
.Fl -help
.Nm
.Fl -version
.Nm
.Fl -verbose
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a builder, not a runner: it fetches an upstream
.Xr claude 1
binary (from a provider package or your own install) and BUILDS a
standalone target from it.
.Nm
itself never executes Claude Code \(en the target it builds does.
.Pp
.Nm Cm build
extracts the upstream JavaScript bundle and fuses it with a pinned
.Xr tjs 1
(QuickJS) runtime into
.Dq quaude ,
a self-contained binary that needs nothing else at run time \(en no Node, no
npm, no network.
.Nm Cm build Fl -naude
instead bakes the bundle into a Node SEA
(single executable application), called
.Dq naude ,
for hosts that already have Node.
.Nm
never installs, names, or replaces anything called
.Ar claude ;
it reads the upstream binary only as the source of the bundle and never
redistributes it.
Both quaude and naude carry Anthropic's code and are derived work: each is
built locally, on your machine, and never distributed.
.Pp
.Fl -version
prints clode's own version and exits, and
.Fl -help
prints clode's own options and exits.
.Fl -verbose
(or
.Ev CLODE_VERBOSE Ns = Ns Cm 1 )
un-mutes clode's own progress, such as bundle extraction and dependency
installation.
The flag is recognized only in the leading position.
Errors are always shown regardless.
.Pp
.Nm Cm fetch
.Op Cm stable | latest | Ar version
fetches an upstream Claude Code host-agnostically (a fixed
.Cm linux-x64
build \(em the embedded JavaScript is the same on every platform) into clode's
provider store and verifies its checksum.
This is the build's input step:
.Nm Cm build
does not fetch on its own \(em it resolves an already-present provider and
fails with a pointer to
.Nm Cm fetch
if none is found.
With no argument the channel is taken from the
.Cm autoUpdatesChannel
setting in
.Pa managed-settings.json
or
.Pa $CLAUDE_CONFIG_DIR/settings.json
(default
.Pa ~/.claude/settings.json ) ,
falling back to
.Cm latest
\(em matching Claude Code's own default.
.Pp
.Nm Cm build
.Op Fl -out Ar path
builds a standalone
.Dq quaude
binary on this machine (default
.Pa ./quaude ) :
the pinned txiki.js runtime plus the extracted Claude Code bundle compiled to
quickjs bytecode, self-contained (no Node, no npm, no network at run time).
The build verifies itself before reporting success \(em a canned offline
Messages round-trip and a
.Fl -quaude-attest
manifest verification \(em and fails loudly otherwise.
The built binary reserves only the
.Fl -quaude-*
option namespace
.Pq currently Fl -quaude-attest
for itself and passes everything else to Claude Code \(en quaude is the one
that executes Claude Code and needs a passthrough namespace;
.Nm
itself no longer does.
The template runtime comes from
.Ev CLODE_TJS
(default
.Pa build/tjs/tjs
under the clode root).
.Pp
.Nm Cm build
.Fl -naude
.Op Fl -out Ar path
bundles Claude Code as a Node SEA instead of a quaude: the extracted bundle is
baked into a self-contained binary built from the host Node.
Node hosts only \(em the SEA build pipeline requires Node
.Ar >= 24
on the build machine.
Like a quaude, a naude carries Anthropic's code and is derived work: it is
built locally and never distributed.
.Pp
A Claude Code binary built by
.Nm
cannot update itself in place: its bundle is baked into its own bytecode.
Where an npm-installed Claude Code's in-app updater would fetch and apply a
new version, a quaude or naude's patched updater callback refuses instead
of lying about success; take a new version by running
.Nm Cm fetch
then
.Nm Cm build
again.
.Pp
.Nm Cm watch
runs one check now for upstream changes that threaten clode's ability to
repackage Claude Code \(en either a break in the shim's correctness or a
Bun/Node API clode does not yet cover \(em prints a summary, and exits.
.Nm Cm build
also performs this check opportunistically, at most once per day, fully in
the background, and prints a one-line notice on the next
.Nm Cm build
only when a newer version carries such signals.
There is no launch to hook it to anymore, so
.Nm Cm build
is where the check runs.
.Pp
The
.Nm
you download is itself a native, self-contained binary \(en no
.Xr node 1 ,
no npm, nothing else at run time; it builds a quaude on a machine that has
never heard of Node.
Running
.Nm
from a source checkout (or an npm install) is the other shape:
.Pa bin/clode
is a Node program
.Pq Li #!/usr/bin/env node
and needs
.Xr node 1
on
.Ev PATH
.Ar >= 20 .
An ES5-safe prologue prints a friendly
.Dq node too old
message on an outdated node; a truly missing node yields
.Li "env: node: not found" .
Either shape,
.Nm Cm build Fl -naude
needs Node
.Ar >= 24
on the host, because a Node SEA is built from a real Node.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width CLODE_CHANGELOG_URL
.It Ev CLODE_VERBOSE
When non-empty, un-mutes clode's own progress output (same as
.Fl -verbose ) .
.It Ev CLODE_CLAUDE_BIN
Absolute path to the upstream claude binary to build from (highest
precedence).
.It Ev CLODE_PROVIDERS
Store for binaries fetched by
.Nm Cm fetch
(default
.Pa ${XDG_DATA_HOME:-$HOME/.local/share}/clode/providers ) .
.It Ev CLODE_RELEASES_URL
Base URL for
.Nm Cm fetch
downloads.
.It Ev CLODE_FETCH_PLATFORM
Which platform's build
.Nm Cm fetch
fetches (default
.Cm linux-x64 ) .
.It Ev CLODE_NO_WATCH
If set, disable the opportunistic drift check that
.Nm Cm build
fires.
.It Ev CLODE_WATCH_INTERVAL
Seconds between opportunistic checks (default 86400).
.It Ev CLODE_WATCH_DIR
Directory for watcher state (throttle + notice); default
.Pa ${XDG_CACHE_HOME:-$HOME/.cache}/clode .
.It Ev CLODE_CHANGELOG_URL
Release-notes source the watcher scans for repackaging-impacting signals.
.It Ev CLODE_CACHE
Cache root (default
.Pa ${XDG_CACHE_HOME:-$HOME/.cache}/clode ) .
.It Ev CLODE_LIBEXEC
Directory holding the extractor and Bun shim.
.It Ev CLODE_TJS
The txiki.js template binary
.Nm Cm build
builds from (default
.Pa build/tjs/tjs
under the clode root).
.It Ev CLODE_NODE
Host node (absolute path).
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa LIBEXEC/extract-claude-js.cjs , Pa LIBEXEC/bun-shim.cjs
Extractor and Bun-global shim.
.It Pa ${XDG_CACHE_HOME:-$HOME/.cache}/clode/<key>/cli.cjs
Per-binary extracted bundle cache.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr claude 1 ,
.Xr node 1
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Amitai Schleier
